
Just as both the gentlest and most violent waves in an ocean are equally water, likewise both attractive
forms and repulsive forms are equally manifestations of emptiness. Realizing this, our mind will become
balanced and peaceful. We will recognize all conventional appearances as the magical play of the mind,
and we will not grasp strongly at their apparent differences.

A magician creates various things
Such as horses, elephants and so forth.
His creations do not actually exist;
You should know all things in the same way.

The last two lines of this verse mean that just as we know that the horses and elephants created by the
magician do not exist, in the same way we should know that all the things that we normally see do notactually  exist.

Develop a mind that is vast like space, where experiences both pleasant and unpleasant can appear and disappear without conflict, struggle or harm. Rest in a mind like vast sky.

The Guest House

This being human is a guest house.
Every morning a new arrival.
A joy,a depression,a meanness,
Some momentary awareness comes 
As an unexpected visitor.

Welcome and entertain them all!
Even if they‛re a crowd of sorrows,
who violently sweep your house
empty of its furniture,

still,treat each guest honourably,
He may be clearing you out for some new delight.

The dark thought,the shame,the malice,
meet them at the door laughing,
and invite them in.

Be grateful for whoever comes,
because each has been sent as a guide from beyond.

===============================================================================================================

Subconscious mind is that part of the brain that functions 24/7, but we essentially do not notice it. It holds a plethora of information that we may come across just once,  but our brain processes it in our subconscious state of mind. This part of the brain does wonders to those who know precisely how to use it in a positive way. Don’t be wary  of its power to bring changes in your life.

The Invisible Hand

There are billions of people in this world and all are different in one way or the other. However, there are areas where people also familiarize others. For instance, some  people look similar, some study the same discipline, some are financially equivalent, and some struggle for similar desires and ambitions. You can find many people who are  similar in every manner yet lead totally different lives.

It’s not hard to find two or more people who possess the same academic qualification, intelligence level, and goals in life. Nevertheless, the lives of each are likely to be significantly different from the rest of the people in the group. The underlying reasons behind variations in lifestyle and success/failure can be numerous. For instance, their social network, financial background, external stimuli or opportunities, luck, physical appearance, or maybe an invisible hand could be the reason.

One thing that is common in almost every successful person is his/her belief. They empower themselves with self-control, motivation, will power, and discipline. Believing that you are entitled to success is not wrong if you keep working hard to achieve success. Wealth, fame, position, and peace of mind cannot be gifted to you, so you must admit that internal drive to achieve your goals is one big factor that can make your dreams come true.

Your subconscious mind is that powerful internal drive!

In order to use your subconscious mind and to make the most of its incredible power, you must know how to train your subconscious mind. Though it may be a bit challenging in the very beginning, you will develop the habit of working as per the required conditions.

Technique Number 1

The first step is to train your subconscious mind to solve problems. This is basically an attempt to improve your analytical skills. Whenever confronted with a problem which you cannot figure out the possible solution to, let your subconscious mind assume your conscious mind’s responsibility. All you need to do is to think about the problem for a while. You can also write a problem statement and keep reviewing it for a few minutes.

Instill the thought that you want your subconscious mind to derive out the possible solution to the problem. Now stop thinking about the problem altogether and just continue with routine tasks. A solution will eventually click in your mind within a few days; try it as it is highly likely to work out for you. This is how your subconscious mind 
helps you in resolving problems.

You can also go the other way around. Review the problem, think about alternative solutions, evaluate and weigh each one of them in terms of their respective pros and cons. Now stop thinking about it until your subconscious mind processes all alternatives to bring out the best option for you. Your analytical skills improve over time and with 
use.

Technique Number 2

Meditation holds importance with reference to training your subconscious mind. Get inspired by new beliefs, think about new ideas, and learn to believe in yourself. Meditation will help you achieve desired levels of mental focus and concentration so that you can gain cognitive power. It also enables you to enjoy the present, while planning for the future.

Technique Number 3

Repeated visualization is extremely effective in training your subconscious mind to enable you to accomplish targets. Set exciting goals, be passionate about them, and imagine the end objective on frequent basis like thrice a day or so. Your mind will then accept the visualization as a part of reality and you will start working to achieve the 
set goals.


===================================================================================================================================================================
1. Happiness is a choice I can make at any moment, regardless of circumstances. I don’t look outside of myself for happiness; I look within.

2. I recognize that any distress that I feel doesn’t come from what happens to me, but from the thoughts that I have about what happened. At the same time, I’m in full control of my thoughts.

3. I know that I can choose to act in a constructive manner, regardless of how I feel. Even if I can’t completely release any negative feelings I may be having, I can ask myself what needs to be done next, and I can go ahead and do it.

4. I define success for myself, instead of blindly chasing after society’s definition of success.

5. I know that remarkability lies in the edges. I allow myself to move toward the edge, and even beyond it.

6. I take responsibility for my life, and I understand that I create my life.

7. I decide what I want to create by setting goals that inspire me and fill me with a sense of purpose.

8. I decide how to use my resources—my time, energy, money, and so on. I choose to use my resources in order to move toward the attainment of my goals.

9. I know that it’s not about hoping for the right circumstances to present themselves, or waiting to acquire the necessary resources; it’s about creating the right circumstances and being more resourceful.

10. I don’t wait for a lucky break; I go out and make my own luck.

11. I live within my means. I keep my liquidity and remain nimble footed.

12. I create passive and residual sources of income so that I don’t have to trade my time for money.

13. I define “wealth” for myself, and I balance my material well-being with my spiritual, physical, and emotional well-being.

14. I clear my home from the accumulation of unused possessions and material things that clutter up my living space.

15. I don’t purchase material goods in order to impress others. I only acquire goods which I really need, or for the genuine enjoyment of the thing itself.

16. I don’t compare myself to others.

17. I place my attention on what I can control, instead of placing it on those things which I can’t control.

18. I know that I choose where to be, and I choose whether to stay or go.

19. I know that there is no such thing as the perfect life. I know that life is about setting goals which I consider to be meaningful, working toward achieving them, and enjoying the journey along the way.

20. I give myself the freedom to be less than perfect.

21. I release my need for ego self-aggrandizement and my need to uphold my own importance.

22. I simplify my life in every way I can.

23. I think for myself and I reach my own conclusions. I question the rules and the way things have always been done, and I decide for myself.

24. I work for the intrinsic satisfaction that comes from doing work that I love, not for external rewards or recognition.

25. I don’t wait to get permission from others in order to go after what I want; the only permission that I need is my own.

26. I allow myself the freedom to make mistakes. I don’t allow myself to be held prisoner by fear of failure.

27. I allow myself to be me; I’m true to myself. I’m not interested in being a second-class version of somebody else; I’m interested in being a first-class version of myself.

28. I don’t wait for something outside of myself to happen–such as getting a degree or a promotion, finding a life partner, or winning an award–, in order to feel good about myself. My self-esteem does not depend on external validation.

29. I question my beliefs to make sure that they’re serving me well. I’m not a slave to my current mental framework of how the world works.

30. I don’t listen to societal or cultural myths that try to dictate to me what I can or cannot do based on my gender, race, or age.

31. I treat my body with respect, care, and love, and I’m not interested in achieving some idealized version of what I should look like based on what’s portrayed in the media.

32. I’m comfortable setting boundaries and saying “no” to projects, tasks, and commitments that are not in alignment with my yearly and life goals.

33. I don’t worry about what others think of me. It’s OK if some people don’t like me.

34. I release myself from others’ expectations of me.

35. I don’t worry about trying to please everyone.

36. I release myself from past hurts and rid myself of any emotional baggage which may be weighing me down and holding me back. I refuse to hold on to grudges, harbor resentments, or nurse old wounds. I don’t allow the past to hold me captive.

37. I allow myself time for leisure and relaxation. I allow myself to have guilt-free play.

38. I don’t try to change the world; I focus on changing myself. I know that the best way to bring more peace, love, and tolerance into the world is to be more peaceful, more loving, and more tolerant.

39. I don’t struggle with the way things are. I know that everything in this moment is as it should be, and all I can do is take tiny steps toward creating a different future.

40. Just as I give myself the freedom to be who I am, I give others the freedom to be who they are.

PEARLS


    Arise, awake and Stop not till the Goal is Reached.

    Let positive, strong, helpful thoughts enter into your brains from very childhood. Lay yourselves open to these thoughts, and not to weakening and paralysing ones.

    Never mind failures; they are quite natural, they are the beauty of life, these failures. What would life be without them? It would not be worth having if it were not for struggles. Where would be the poetry of life? Never mind the struggles, the mistakes. I never heard a cow tell a lie, but it is only a cow—never a man. So never mind these failures, these little backslidings; hold the ideal a thousand times, and if you fail a thousand times, make the attempt once more.

    Say, ‘This misery that I am suffering is of my own doing, and that very thing proves that it will have to be undone by me alone.’ That which I created, I can demolish; that which is created by someone else, I shall never be able to destroy. Therefore, stand up, be bold, be strong. Take the whole responsibility on your own shoulders, and know that you are the creators of your own destiny. All the strength and success you want is within ourselves.

    We must overcome difficulty by constant practice. We must learn that nothing can happen to us unless we make ourselves susceptible to it.

    Take up an idea, devote yourself to it, struggle on in patience, and the sun will rise for you.

    Education is the manifestation of perfection present already in man. Religion is the manifestation of the divinity already in man.

    Give me few men and women who are pure and selfless and I shall shake the world.

    Strength is Life, Weakness is death.

    Condemn none: if you can stretch out a helping hand, do so. If you cannot, fold your hands, bless your brothers, and let them go their own way.

    This life is short, the vanities of the world are transient, but they alone live who live for others, the rest are more dead than alive.

    You cannot believe in God until you believe in yourself.

    When we really begin to live in the world, then we understand what is meant by brotherhood or mankind, and not before.

    External nature is only internal nature writ large.

    The world is the great gymnasium where we come to make ourselves strong.

    Feel like Christ and you will be a Christ; feel like Buddha and you will be a Buddha. It is feeling that is the life, the strength, the vitality, without which no amount of intellectual activity can reach God.

    The will is not free—it is a phenomenon bound by cause and effect—but there is something behind the will which is free.

    The more we come out and do good to others, the more our hearts will be purified, and God will be in them.

    There is nothing beyond God, and the sense enjoyments are simply something through which we are passing now in the hope of getting better things.

    The moment I have realized God sitting in the temple of every human body, the moment I stand in reverence before every human being and see God in him — that moment I am free from bondage, everything that binds vanishes, and I am free.

    Our duty is to encourage every one in his struggle to live up to his own highest idea, and strive at the same time to make the ideal as near as possible to the Truth.

    That man has reached immortality who is disturbed by nothing material.

    You have to grow from the inside out. None can teach you, none can make you spiritual. There is no other teacher but your own soul.

    The goal of mankind is knowledge. . . . Now this knowledge is inherent in man. No knowledge comes from outside: it is all inside. What we say a man "knows," should, in strict psychological language, be what he "discovers" or "unveils"; what man "learns" is really what he discovers by taking the cover off his own soul, which is a mine of infinite knowledge.

    If money help a man to do good to others, it is of some value; but if not, it is simply a mass of evil, and the sooner it is got rid of, the better.

    All differences in this world are of degree, and not of kind, because oneness is the secret of everything.

    To devote your life to the good of all and to the happiness of all is religion. Whatever you do for your own sake is not religion.

    The greatest religion is to be true to your own nature. Have faith in yourselves!

    The spirit is the cause of all our thoughts and body-action, and everything, but it is untouched by good or evil, pleasure or pain, heat or cold, and all the dualism of nature, although it lends its light to everything.

    It is our own mental attitude which makes the world what it is for us. Our thought make things beautiful, our thoughts make things ugly. The whole world is in our own minds. Learn to see things in the proper light. First, believe in this world — that there is meaning behind everything. Everything in the world is good, is holy and beautiful. If you see something evil, think that you are not understanding it in the right light. throw the burden on yourselves!

    In one word, this ideal is that you are divine.

    All the powers in the universe are already ours. It is we who have put our hands before our eyes and cry that it is dark.

    If faith in ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a very large portion of the evils and miseries that we have would have vanished.

    Where can we go to find God if we cannot see Him in our own hearts and in every living being?

    The Vedanta teaches that Nirvana can be attained here and now, that we do not have to wait for death to reach it. Nirvana is the realization of the Self; and after having once known that, if only for an instant, never again can one be deluded by the mirage of personality.

    The Vedanta recognizes no sin it only recognizes error. And the greatest error, says the Vedanta is to say that you are weak, that you are a sinner, a miserable creature, and that you have no power and you cannot do this and that.

    Never think there is anything impossible for the soul. It is the greatest heresy to think so. If there is sin, this is the only sin — to say that you are weak, or others are weak.

    Truth can be stated in a thousand different ways, yet each one can be true.

    "I am the thread that runs through all these pearls," and each pearl is a religion or even a sect thereof. Such are the different pearls, and God is the thread that runs through all of them; most people, however, are entirely unconscious of it.

    “Comfort” is no test of truth; on the contrary, truth is often far from being “comfortable.”

    “Face the brutes.” That is a lesson for all life — face the terrible, face it boldly. Like the monkeys, the hardships of life fall back when we cease to flee before them.

    A few heart-whole, sincere, and energetic men and women can do more in a year than a mob in a century.

    A tremendous stream is flowing toward the ocean, carrying us all along with it; and though like straws and scraps of paper we may at times float aimlessly about, in the long run we are sure to join the Ocean of Life and Bliss.

    All is the Self or Brahman. The saint, the sinner, the lamb, the tiger, even the murderer, as far as they have any reality, can be nothing else, because there is nothing else.

    All knowledge that the world has ever received comes from the mind; the infinite library of the universe is in our own mind.

    All that is real in me is God; all that is real in God is I. The gulf between God and me is thus bridged. Thus by knowing God, we find that the kingdom of heaven is within us.

    All truth is eternal. Truth is nobody’s property; no race, no individual can lay any exclusive claim to it. Truth is the nature of all souls.

    All who have actually attained any real religious experience never wrangle over the form in which the different religions are expressed. They know that the soul of all religions is the same and so they have no quarrel with anybody just because he or she does not speak in the same tongue.

    Anything that brings spiritual, mental, or physical weakness, touch it not with the toes of your feet.

    Anything that is secret and mysterious in these systems of yoga should be at once rejected. The best guide in life is strength. In religion, as in all other matters, discard everything that weakens you, have nothing to do with it.

    Are great things ever done smoothly? Time, patience, and indomitable will must show.

    Are you unselfish? That is the question. If you are, you will be perfect without reading a single religious book, without going into a single church or temple.

    As body, mind, or soul, you are a dream; you really are Being, Consciousness, Bliss (satchidananda). You are the God of this universe.

    As long as we believe ourselves to be even the least different from God, fear remains with us; but when we know ourselves to be the One, fear goes; of what can we be afraid?

    As soon as I think that I am a little body, I want to preserve it, to protect it, to keep it nice, at the expense of other bodies; then you and I become separate.

    As soon as you know the voice and understand what it is, the whole scene changes. The same world which was the ghastly battlefield of maya is now changed into something good and beautiful.

    Astrology and all these mystical things are generally signs of a weak mind; therefore as soon as they are becoming prominent in our minds, we should see a physician, take good food, and rest.

    Be a hero. Always say, “I have no fear.” Tell this to everyone—“Have no fear.”

    Be perfectly resigned, perfectly unconcerned; then alone can you do any true work. No eyes can see the real forces; we can only see the results. Put out self, forget it; just let God work, it is His business.

    Blows are what awaken us and help to break the dream. They show us the insufficiency of this world and make us long to escape, to have freedom.

    Both the forces of good and evil will keep the universe alive for us, until we awake from our dreams and give up this building of mud pies.

    Come out into the broad light of day, come out from the little narrow paths, for how can the infinite soul rest content to live and die in small ruts?

    Come out into the universe of Light. Everything in the universe is yours, stretch out your arms and embrace it with love. If you every felt you wanted to do that, you have felt God.

    Delusion will vanish as the light becomes more and more effulgent, load after load of ignorance will vanish, and then will come a time when all else has disappeared and the sun alone shines.

    Desire, ignorance, and inequality—this is the trinity of bondage.

    Despondency is not religion, whatever else it may be.

    Do any deserve liberty who are not ready to give it to others? Let us calmly go to work, instead of dissipating our energy in unnecessary fretting and fuming.

    Do not look back upon what has been done. Go ahead!

    Don't look back—forward, infinite energy, infinite enthusiasm, infinite daring, and infinite patience—then alone can great deeds be accomplished.

    Each work has to pass through these stages—ridicule, opposition, and then acceptance. Those who think ahead of their time are sure to be misunderstood.

    Even the greatest fool can accomplish a task if it were after his or her heart. But the intelligent ones are those who can convert every work into one that suits their taste.

    Every action that helps us manifest our divine nature more and more is good; every action that retards it is evil.

    Every individual is a center for the manifestation of a certain force. This force has been stored up as the resultant of our previous works, and each one of us is born with this force at our back.

    Every step I take in light is mine forever.

    Everything must be sacrificed, if necessary, for that one sentiment: universality.

    Fear is death, fear is sin, fear is hell, fear is unrighteousness, fear is wrong life. All the negative thoughts and ideas that are in the world have proceeded from this evil spirit of fear.

    Fill the brain with high thoughts, highest ideals, place them day and night before you, and out of that will come great work.

    First get rid of the delusion “I am the body,” then only will we want real knowledge.

    First, believe in the world—that there is meaning behind everything.

    Freedom can never be reached by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell your body that it is strong, tell your mind that it is strong, and have unbounded faith and hope in yourself.

    Go on saying, “I am free.” Never mind if the next moment delusion comes and says, “I am bound.” Dehypnotize the whole thing.

    God is merciful to those whom He sees struggling heart and soul for realization. But remain idle, without any struggle, and you will see that His grace will never come.

    God is self-evident, impersonal, omniscient, the Knower and the Master of nature, the Lord of all. He is behind all worship and it is being done according to Him, whether we know it or not.

    God is very merciful to those whom He sees struggling heart and soul for spiritual realization. But remain idle, without any struggle, and you will see that His grace will never come.

    Great work requires great and persistent effort for a long time. … Character has to be established through a thousand stumbles.

    Have you got the will to surmount mountain-high obstructions? If the whole world stands against you sword in hand, would you still dare to do what you think is right?

    He whom the sages have been seeking in all these places is in our own hearts; the voice that you heard was right, says Vedanta, but the direction you gave to the voice was wrong.

    Hold to the idea, “I am not the mind, I see that I am thinking, I am watching my mind act,” and each day the identification of yourself with thoughts and feelings will grow less, until at last you can entirely separate yourself from the mind and actually know it to be apart from yourself.

    However we may receive blows, and however knocked about we may be, the Soul is there and is never injured. We are that Infinite.

    I fervently wish no misery ever came near anyone; yet it is that alone that gives us an insight into the depths of our lives, does it not? In our moments of anguish, gates barred forever seem to open and let in many a flood of light.

    I, for one, thoroughly believe that no power in the universe can withhold from anyone anything he really deserves.

    If a piece of burning charcoal be placed on a man’s head, see how he struggles to throw it off. Similar will be the struggle for freedom of those who really understand that they are slaves of nature.

    If superstition enters, the brain is gone.

    If there is one word that you find coming out like a bomb from the Upanishads, bursting like a bombshell upon masses of ignorance, it is the word “fearlessness.”

    If you think that you are bound, you remain bound; you make your own bondage. If you know that you are free, you are free this moment. This is knowledge, knowledge of freedom. Freedom is the goal of all nature.

    If you want to have life, you have to die every moment for it. Life and death are only different expressions of the same thing looked at from different standpoints; they are the falling and the rising of the same wave, and the two form one whole.

    Impurity is a mere superimposition under which your real nature has become hidden. But the real you is already perfect, already strong.

    Is there any sex-distinction in the Atman (Self)? Out with the differentiation between man and woman—all is Atman! Give up the identification with the body, and stand up!

    It is feeling that is the life, the strength, the vitality, without which no amount of intellectual activity can reach God.

    It is the cheerful mind that is persevering. It is the strong mind that hews its way through a thousand difficulties.

    It is the patient building of character, the intense struggle to realize the truth, which alone will tell in the future of humanity.

    Karma is the eternal assertion of human freedom. If we can bring ourselves down by our karma, surely it is in our power to raise ourselves by our own karma.

    Knowledge can only be got in one way, the way of experience; there is no other way to know.

    Learning and wisdom are superfluities, the surface glitter merely, but it is the heart that is the seat of all power.

    Learning and wisdom are superfluities, the surface glitter merely, but it is the heart that is the seat of all power. It is not in the brain but in the heart that the Atman, possessed of knowledge, power, and activity, has its seat.

    Let us not depend upon the world for pleasure.

    Let us worship the spirit in spirit, standing on spirit. Let the foundation be spirit, the middle spirit, the culmination spirit.

    Look upon every man, woman, and everyone as God. You cannot help anyone, you can only serve: serve the children of the Lord, serve the Lord Himself, if you have the privilege.

    Nature, body, mind go to death, not we. We neither go nor come. The man Vivekananda is in nature, is born and dies; but the Self we see as Vivekananda is never born and never dies. It is the eternal and unchangeable Reality.

    Neither seek nor avoid; take what comes. It is liberty to be affected by nothing. Do not merely endure; be unattached.

    No authority can save us, no beliefs. If there is a God, all can find Him. No one needs to be told it is warm; all can discover it for themselves. So it should be with God. He should be a fact in the consciousness of every person.

    One who leans on others cannot serve the God of Truth.

    Our first duty is not to hate ourselves, because to advance we must have faith in ourselves first and then in God. Those who have no faith in themselves can never have faith in God.

    Our supreme duty is to advance toward freedom—physical, mental, and spiritual—and help others to do so.

    Perfection does not come from belief or faith. Talk does not count for anything. Parrots can do that. Perfection comes through selfless work.

    Perfection is always infinite. We are the Infinite already.You and I, and all beings, are trying to manifest that infinity.

    Please everyone without becoming a hypocrite or a coward.

    Pray all the time, read all the scriptures in the world, and worship all the gods there are ...but unless you realize the Truth, there is no freedom.

    Pray all the time, read all the scriptures in the world, and worship all the gods there are …[but] unless you realize the Self (atman), there is no freedom.

    Purity, patience, and perseverance are the three essentials to success and, above all, love.

    Religion as a science, as a study, is the greatest and healthiest exercise that the human mind can have.

    Religion has no business to formulate social laws and insist on the difference between beings, because its aim and end is to obliterate all such fictions and monstrosities.

    So long as there is desire or want, it is a sure sign that there is imperfection. A perfect, free being cannot have any desire.

    Soft-brained people, weak-minded, chicken-hearted, cannot find the truth. One has to be free, and as broad as the sky.

    Stand as a rock; you are indestructible. You are the Self (atman), the God of the universe.

    Stand up, be bold, be strong. Take the whole responsibility on your own shoulders, and know that you are the creator of your own destiny. All the strength and succor you want is within yourself. Therefore make your own future.

    Stand upon the Self, only then can we truly love the world. Take a very high stand; knowing our universal nature, we must look with perfect calmness upon all the panorama of the world.

    Strength is the sign of vigor, the sign of life, the sign of hope, the sign of health, and the sign of everything that is good. As long as the body lives, there must be strength in the body, strength in the mind, strength in the hand.

    Superstition is our great enemy, but bigotry is worse.

    Tell the truth boldly, whether it hurts or not. Never pander to weakness. If truth is too much for intelligent people and sweeps them away, let them go; the sooner the better.

    Thank God for giving you this world as a moral gymnasium to help your development, but never imagine you can help the world.

    The essence of Vedanta is that there is but one Being and that every soul is that Being in full, not a part of that Being.

    The essential thing in religion is making the heart pure; the Kingdom of Heaven is within us, but only the pure in heart can see the King. While we think of the world, it is only the world for us; but let us come to it with the feeling that the world is God, and we shall have God.

    The first sign that you are becoming religious is that you are becoming cheerful.

    The greatest religion is to be true to your own nature. Have faith in yourselves!

    The human soul has sojourned in lower and higher forms, migrating from one to another according to the samskaras or impressions, but it is only in the highest form as a human being that it attains to freedom.

    The idea of perfect womanhood is perfect independence.

    The important thing is: how much less you think of the body, of yourself as matter—as dead, dull, insentient matter; how much more you think of yourself as shining immortal being.

    The less passion there is, the better we work. The calmer we are, the better for us and the more the amount of work we can do. When we let loose our feelings, we waste so much energy, shatter our nerves, disturb our minds, and accomplish very little work.

    The mind is but the subtle part of the body. You must retain great strength in your mind and words.

    The mistake is that we cling to the body when it is the spirit that is really immortal.

    The more you think of yourself as shining immortal spirit, the more eager you will be to be absolutely free of matter, body, and senses. This is the intense desire to be free.

    The past was great no doubt, but I sincerely believe that the future will be more glorious still.

    The power is with the silent ones, who only live and love and then withdraw their personality. They never say “me” and “mine”; they are only blessed in being instruments.

    The powers of the mind are like the rays of the sun when they are concentrated they illumine.

    The power of purity—it is a definite power.

    The powers of the mind should be concentrated and the mind turned back upon itself; as the darkest places reveal their secrets before the penetrating rays of the sun, so will the concentrated mind penetrate its own innermost secrets.

    The Self when it appears behind the universe is called God. The same Self when it appears behind this little universe—the body—is the soul.

    The Soul is not composed of any materials. It is unity indivisible. Therefore it must be indestructible.

    The varieties of religious belief are an advantage, since all faiths are good, so far as they encourage us to lead a religious life. The more sects there are, the more opportunities there are for making a successful appeal to the divine instinct in all of us.

    The whole secret of existence is to have no fear. Never fear what will become of you, depend on no one. Only the moment you reject all help are you free.

    The whole universe is one. There is only one Self in the universe, only One Existence.

    The world is ready to give up its secrets if we only know how to knock, how to give it the necessary blow. The strength and force of the blow come through concentration.

    There cannot be friendship without equality.

    There is no help for you outside of yourself; you are the creator of the universe. Like the silkworm you have built a cocoon around yourself…. Burst your own cocoon and come out as the beautiful butterfly, as the free soul. Then alone you will see Truth.

    There is one thing to be remembered: that the assertion — I am God — cannot be made with regard to the sense-world.

    There is only one sin. That is weakness.... The only saint is that soul that never weakens, faces everything, and determines to die game.

    There is to be found in every religion the manifestation of the struggle toward freedom. It is the groundwork of all morality, of unselfishness, which means getting rid of the idea that human beings are the same as this little body.

    This earth is higher than all the heavens; this is the greatest school in the universe.

    This I have seen in life—those who are overcautious about themselves fall into dangers at every step; those who are afraid of losing honor and respect, get only disgrace; and those who are always afraid of loss, always lose.

    This is no world. It is God Himself. In delusion we call it world.

    This is the first lesson to learn: be determined not to curse anything outside, not to lay the blame upon anyone outside, but stand up, lay the blame on yourself. You will find that is always true. Get hold of yourself.

    This is the great lesson that we are here to learn through myriads of births and heavens and hells—that there is nothing to be asked for, desired for, beyond one’s spiritual Self (atman).

    This life is a hard fact; work your way through it boldly, though it may be adamantine; no matter, the soul is stronger.

    Those who grumble at the little thing that has fallen to their lot to do will grumble at everything. Always grumbling, they will lead a miserable life, and everything will be a failure. But those who do their duties as they go, putting their shoulders to the wheel, will see the light, and higher duties will fall to their share.

    Those who work at a thing heart and soul not only achieve success in it but through their absorption in that they also realize the supreme truth—Brahman. Those who work at a thing with their whole heart receive help from God.

    To believe blindly is to degenerate the human soul. Be an atheist if you want, but do not believe in anything unquestioningly.

    Truth does not pay homage to any society, ancient or modern. Society has to pay homage to Truth or die.

    Understanding human nature is the highest knowledge, and only by knowing it can we know God. It is also a fact that the knowledge of God is the highest knowledge, and only by knowing God can we understand human nature.

    Unselfishness is God.

    Watch people do their most common actions; these are indeed the things that will tell you the real character of a great person.

    We are ever free if we would only believe it, only have faith enough. You are the soul, free and eternal, ever free, ever blessed. Have faith enough and you will be free in a minute.

    We believe that every being is divine, is God. Every soul is a sun covered over with clouds of ignorance; the difference between soul and soul is owing to the difference in density of these layers of clouds.

    We came to enjoy; we are being enjoyed. We came to rule; we are being ruled. We came to work; we are being worked. All the time, we find that. And this comes into every detail of our life.

    We have to go back to philosophy to treat things as they are. We are suffering from our own karma. It is not the fault of God. What we do is our own fault, nothing else. Why should God be blamed?

    We must approach religion with reverence and with love, and our heart will stand up and say, this is truth, and this is untruth.

    We must be bright and cheerful. Long faces do not make religion. Religion should be the most joyful thing in the world, because it is the best.

    We must have friendship for all; we must be merciful toward those that are in misery; when people are happy, we ought to be happy; and to the wicked we must be indifferent. These attitudes will make the mind peaceful.

    We reap what we sow. We are the makers of our own fate. None else has the blame, none has the praise.

    We want to know in order to make ourselves free. That is our life: one universal cry for freedom.

    What do you gain in heaven? You become gods, drink nectar, and get rheumatism. There is less misery there than on earth, but also less truth.

    What the world wants is character. The world is in need of those whose life is one burning love, selfless. That love will make every word tell like a thunderbolt.

    When we come to nonattachment, then we can understand the marvelous mystery of the universe: how it is intense activity and at the same time intense peace, how it is work every moment and rest every moment.

    When we have become free, we need not go mad and throw up society and rush off to die in the forest or the cave; we shall remain where we were but we shall understand the whole thing. The same phenomena will remain but with a new meaning.

    When we have become free, we need not go mad and throw up society and rush off to die in the forest or the cave; we shall remain where we were, only we shall understand the whole thing.

    Whenever we attain a higher vision, the lower vision disappears of itself.

    Who makes us ignorant? We ourselves. We put our hands over our eyes and weep that it is dark.

    Why are people so afraid? The answer is that they have made themselves helpless and dependent on others. We are so lazy, we do not want to do anything ourselves. We want a Personal God, a Savior or a Prophet to do everything for us.

    Woman has suffered for eons, and that has given her infinite patience and infinite perseverance.

    Women will work out their destinies — much better, too, than men can ever do for them. All the mischief to women has come because men undertook to shape the destiny of women.

    Work and worship are necessary to take away the veil, to lift off the bondage and illusion.

    Work on with the intrepidity of a lion but at the same time with the tenderness of a flower.

    Worship of society and popular opinion is idolatry. The soul has no sex, no country, no place, no time.

